# Rationale

<!-- IMPORTANT: Keep the line above as the first line. -->
<!-- This file is a static page and included in the ./CMakeLists.txt file. -->

During the development of QDMI, we had to take several design decision, which we want to outline in
the following. This page is supposed to serve as a reference for why things are as they are in QDMI.
Simultaneously, it should help to get a better understanding of the principles of QDMI. To this end,
this page is useful for everyone working with QDMI.

\tableofcontents

## Components of the Interface {#rationale-components}

QDMI consists of three components, namely:

- the client,
- the device, and
- the driver.

The device represents the physical quantum computer or also a classical simulator imitating a
quantum computer. Multiple devices are managed by the driver. For that the driver maintains a list
of devices that are currently available. A driver can decide for itself how it implements the
connection to the devices. For example, the example implementation of a driver @ref
qdmi_example_driver.cpp loads the devices as dynamic libraries. For that the device implementations
must be compiled to dynamic libraries and the location of those libraries must be made known to the
driver. A different approach would be to link the device implementations statically into the driver.

The client is the user of the QDMI library. The driver provides access to various devices for the
client. The client can use the different functions defined by the interface to gather information
about the devices or to submit jobs for execution. To this end, the client calls the respective
functions of the driver that in turn forwards the requests to the respective device. For that
purpose the function invoked on the driver contains a handle to the device such that the driver
knows the device to forward the request to.

This setup results in the following responsibilities for the components: The device must implement
all functions defined by QDMI such that they can be called by the driver. Additionally, the device
must implement the types for sites, operations, and jobs. Handles to those are passed to the driver
and further to the clients to refer to the respective object. However, only the device knows the
implementation of those; for the other components those handles are only opaque pointers. The
implementation of those types can be used by the device to store information about the sites,
operations, and jobs, respectively.

The driver must implement the client interface since it receives the calls by the client.
Furthermore, the driver is responsible for the management of the devices. The devices for a client
are managed in sessions. Hence, a client must first create a session and through the session the
client can access the devices. To this end, the driver has to implement the type session that can
store information about itself. Similar to the device's type, the session is just an opaque handle
for the client and only the driver knows about its implementation.

The interplay of the components is illustrated in the following schematic. It also contains the
various interfaces that are described in the next section.

![](_static/qdmi_schematic.pdf)

## Session, Control and Query Interface {#rationale-interfaces}

As depicted in the schematic above, the components of QDMI communicate through three different
interfaces, namely:

- the session interface,
- the control interface, and
- the query interface.

However, those interfaces do not map directly to the components of QDMI. Instead, the session
interface is exclusively used for the communication between the client and the driver. The clients
calls function of the session interface that is implemented by the driver.

The control and query interfaces facilitate the communication between the client and the device.
Nevertheless, the communication does not take place directly between those components and goes
always through the driver. To this end, the control and query interface have two sides, the client
and device side. The device side of the control and query interface are implemented by the device
and consumed by the driver. In turn, the client side is implemented by the driver and consumed by
the client.

The split of this part of QDMI into the control and query interface is motivated by the fact that
the control interface is used to control job execution and everything connected to it. The
information flow here is bidirectional. On the other hand, the information flow through the query
interface is purely unidirectional from the device to the client.

## Prefixing Device Implementations {#rationale-prefix}

All symbols and types defined by each device must be prefixed with a unique prefix. First, hardware
vendors can define their own prefix and make their implementation to their own. Besides the branding
aspect this eases debugging and maintenance of the code. When an error occurs, the error message
will contain the function name where the error occurred. By having a unique prefix, it is clear in
which device the error occurred.

Moreover, a unique prefix is necessary to facilitate the static linking of the device
implementations. When the device implementations are linked statically into the driver, the symbols
must be unique otherwise the linker will report name conflicts.

## Data Retrieval Management {#rationale-retrieval}

The interface contains a couple of functions to retrieve information in various formats. The
functions are designed in a generic fashion such that almost arbitrary data can be transferred.
Before we explain the usage of the function, we shortly highlight the advantages of this design.
Another alternative to the chosen one, would be to introduce a new function for each type that can
be retrieved. Since the type of data is very individual to the property whose value should be
retrieved, this would require a specific function for almost every property. Even though some
properties of the same type could be poold into one function, this design would make the interface
inflexible. For every new property that should be added that brings a new type a new function would
have to be added to the interface which introduces a breaking change. Hence, devices not
implementing this newly added property could not be used with the updated interface. One extreme
variant of the above would be to have a function for each individual property which is not desired
because of the same reasoning.

The chosen design allows for a better compatibility with future versions of the interface. When a
new property is added, this can simply added to the list of properties. The retrieval of its value
can be implemented via the same functions and the interface does not break. Device implementations
of an older interface version might just return \ref QDMI_ERROR_INVALIDARGUMENT for the newly added
properties but no segmentation fault or similar happens.

In the following, the general usage of functions for data retrieval is explained by the aid of the
example of \ref QDMI_query_device_property. This function receives a handle to a device that is—in
the view of the client—an opaque pointer to a device. This device handle must first be retrieved
from the function \ref QDMI_session_get_devices. This function has the signature:

```C
int QDMI_session_get_devices(QDMI_Session session, size_t num_entries, QDMI_Device *devices, size_t *num_devices)
```

To retrieve handles to the device, the client must allocate some memory region where it wants to
store the handles. This memory region is passed in the parameter `devices`. The parameter
`num_entries` specifies the number of devices that fit into the allocated memory. The client can
come to know the size of a single device handle by calling the function `sizeof(QDMI_Device)` and
use that to allocate a properly sized memory region. The parameter `num_devices` is a pointer to a
variable that will store the number of devices that were actually written into the allocated memory
after calling the function. The function can also be called with a `NULL` pointer for `devices` to
only retrieve the number of devices that are available which will in this case be returned in
`num_devices`. Simultaneously, if `num_devices` is `NULL`it is ignored and the function only writes
the number of devices into the memory pointed to by `devices`.

With the device handles at hand, the function \ref QDMI_query_device_property can be called for one
device. The signature of the function is:

```C
int QDMI_query_device_property(QDMI_Device device, QDMI_Device_Property prop, size_t size, void *value, size_t *size_ret)
```

The semantics of this function is actually similar to the one described earlier. The first two
parameters denote the device and the property to query. This time `value` is a pointer to a memory
region of type `void*`. The parameter `size` specifies the size of the memory region pointed to by
`value` in the number of bytes, i.e., _not_ the number of times the type of the property fits into
the memory region. The parameter `size_ret` is a pointer to a variable that will store the number of
bytes that were actually written into the memory region pointed to by `value`. To retrieve the
actual returned value of the property, the client must cast the pointer `value` to the type of the
property. The type it must be casted to is defined by the property and can be taken from the
documentation of the property.
